# Freemium-to-Premium

## The Problem: 
High Note is an online music and social company that allows anyone to sign up and listen to music for free. Due to the increasing popularity of music streaming platforms over the years, consumers have a multitude of options right at their fingertips. This has left High Note struggling with a stagnant user base and not-so-impressive revenues. Even though paid subscribers are 24 times more profitable than free users, offering a freemium option allows for brand awareness and sale of advertising space. (Case, pg 8) To combat this problem, High Note needs a strong digital marketing strategy to attract premium users (net new and conversion) and keep users engaged. To create this strategy, the team needed to first dive into existing user data to understand who the target listener is and what aspects of the platform are important to attract new users. 

## Research Findings (Provided Data Set): 
The data contains 107,213 observations out of which 100,000 are non-adopters and the remaining 7,213 (6.72%) users purchased a premium plan (adopters). In comparison of the two, adopters are slightly older (26 vs. 24), more often male (53% vs. 39%), more often international - not US, UK, Germany (51% vs. 39%), and have been on High Note ~2 months longer (41.5 vs. 39.4). Adopters are also highly social as compared to non-adopters, with more shouts (73 vs. 17), posts (17 vs. 3), friend count (28 vs. 11), and premium friend count (1.25 vs. 0.27). Lastly, adopters are more active on High Note, with more songs listened (26k vs. 12k), loved tracks (226 vs 67) and playlists (1.15 vs. 0.49). (Exhibit 1 & 3)
In review of users that converted to premium, 3 months before converting they had a higher friend count (1.5 vs. 0.4), listened to more songs (1500 vs 520), posted more (0.06 vs. 1.3), and liked more tracks (2.6 vs. 12.3). 3 months after converting they increased all these factors even further. (Exhibit 2 & 4) 
Next, we ran multiple analysis to identify if there was any correlation or causation among the variables to help predict adoption. After review of correlation charts, logistic regression, and CART models we found that we are unable to make conclusive remarks about predicting and causing adoption. (Exhibit 5, 6, 7) Therefore, we had to run causal inference with maximum propensity matching to assist with the fact that 9 months of data does not encompass the need for randomized control trials. The findings show that the three variables with the most effect on user adoption are: 
1)	Add 1 premium subscriber friend = 1.085 times increase in adoption 
2)	Create 1 post in the 3 months prior to adoption = 1.125 times increase in adoption
3)	Create 1 playlist in the 3 months prior to adoption = 1.18 times increase in adoption (Exhibit 8) 

## Research Findings (External Competitors):
Now that we understand High Note users and what can lead to adoption, we turn to look at digital marketing practices in the online music streaming industry. We compiled research on top competitors in the space, including Spotify, Apple Music, Amazon, and YouTube Music. Among these competitors, we found that Instagram was by far the heaviest used for social digital ads. We also found that display ads were used over video ads, and there was an emphasis on desktop over mobile. We also found that music streaming digital ad spend varied from $180k to $24M. (Exhibit 9) 
Of the competition, Spotify has seen the most success in growth of users and conversion rates. To attract users, Spotify invests in advertisements that rely on pop culture references, song lyrics, and humor to attract the younger listener. Spotify also invests in campaigns such as “Wrapped,” which allows users to post their most listened to songs and artists from the year. This creates a fear of missing out among users on social media that are not on Spotify, as well as competition among users that increases user engagement. In 2020, this campaign was responsible for increasing app downloads by 21% in one week. The process of new sign up’s is also made easy for quick conversion, with a clean home page, promotion of freemium first, and pulling personal information from Facebook. This reduction of user friction to enter information with one click leads to a 20% increase in signups. On the premium user side, as of Q1 2020 Spotify had a conversion rate of 46.2%. This is largely driven by Spotify’s strategy to create a slightly unfriendly experience for freemium users. This includes audio advertisements between songs that are often repetitive to disrupt the user experience. There are also restrictions on the skip button, and only 30 days of offline listening allowed. (Source: Spotify)


## Recommendations: 
As mentioned above, the goal of High Note’s digital marketing strategy is to attract premium users (net new and conversion) and keep users engaged. There are 3 recommendations listed below to tackle these goals:
1.	Incentivize premium subscribers to share with their social network to drive premium user growth
High Note needs to incentivize their 37k premium subscribers to externally discuss their subscription with their social networks. A study done by the University of Minnesota found that peer influence causes more than 50% increase in odds of buying the product due to the influence coming from an adopting friend. (Do Friends Make You Pay? by Bapna & Umyarov) Facebook found that users who saw a social message of friends doing an action were 0.39% more likely to also do the action vs. users who received an informational message with no social proof. (Hype Machine, Ch. 7 – voting) These proof points along with our findings above that premium subscriber friend count is one of the three most effective variables of driving adoption for High Note users, as well as the Spotify example of “Wrapped” shows utilizing friends and the “fear of missing out” is an effective way to drive premium user growth. 
To incentivize premium users to share their experience, High Note should introduce a referral program to create viral incentive impact. Utilizing Uber’s referral program as a point of reference, one of the most successful in the world, when a new premium user joins with a friend’s referral code both listeners will earn a bonus. It is important to offer the benefit to the new user as well, otherwise findings have shown the premium users feel uncomfortable spamming their friends and getting a reward for it. Offering a benefit for both users is the most likely to lead to success. This strategy will be effective as friends know their network’s preferences and can route invitations effectively, as well as this creates a local network effect due to a reduction in users leaving the platform. (Hype Machine, Ch. 8)

2.	Create more use within the platform to increase user engagement and premium conversion
Our analysis on the High Note data set showed that posting and creating playlists are highly impactful on converting to premium within the next 3 months. We also found that overall adopters are more likely to be social and active on the platform.  This means we have to push our freemium users to become more active and engaged, which will in turn lead to a longer customer lifetime as well as a higher percentage of conversion. To accomplish this, first we would create a program in which we suggest new friend connections to users based on their music preferences. The more friends users have, the more they will be incentivized to post and read other’s posts. We would also create a campaign called “Question of the Day” in which High Note poses a question such as “What is the most underrated song of the year?” This will give users a reason to post and interact with one another. For playlists, we will create a program in which the most listened to and shared playlists generated by users will be shared to the whole platform. This will create competition and users to want to create playlists that showcase their preferences.

3.	Advertise on Instagram & with display ads to increase lift of net new subscribers 
As reviewed above, Instagram ads are by far the heaviest used social networking tool among music competition We also know that display ads are used much more than video. Creating true lift, the extent to which an ad changes behavior, is important to increase new users. (Hype Machine, Ch. 6) Disregarding the N/A data in our set, we know that the average High Note user is male, 22-30 years old, and not from the US, UK, or Germany. We need to bid within the marketplace of digital inventory to identify those that match our typical demographics. We also want to retarget ads, as only 2% of visitors purchase on the first visit and click through rates for display ads is 0.07%, however 0.7% click through on the retarget. (S2 Slides)
